---
title: 'Part I: A Historical Analysis of Bretton Woods'
author: "me"
socialImage: ''
date: '2023-11-24'
tags:
  - economics
  - politics
---
_This is the first part of some ongoing research I'm doing out of my curiousity around systems for international economy. In this first part, I'll introduce the trilemma I find useful to understanding these systems, and discuss the Bretton Woods system in the context of this trilemma. In later posts, I'll explore the alternative idea presented by the British side at the Bretton Woods Conference - the International Clearing Union (Bancor). I'll look at the design of that system through the same trilemma, to understand which tradeoffs it chooses. Lastly, I'll make arguments about the conditions in which the contemporary international economy exists to see if the ICU presents a worthwhile option to explore once again._

_I do want to apologize in advance for the tone of this writing, as its from a paper I submitted to one of my political economy classes. I've done a little cleanup to sound less essay-y, but it's still kinda cringe. The contents are still a good, but VERY brief, introduction to this complicated time period._

_Written Nov 24, 2023. Revised & posted April 2024._

--- 

At the heart of the global economy lies the international monetary system, a network of agreements which aim to support the function of economies both domestically and internationally. As civilization progressed in political and economic spheres, differing needs moved the world through historic systems such as the bimetallic and gold standards, to the modern era of Bretton Woods and today’s floating exchange rates. In “The Globalization Paradox”, Dani Rodrik describes an effective framework for navigating this complexity – the “political trilemma of the world economy”. This trilemma encapsulates the inherent trade-offs among globalization, national sovereignty, and democratic governance within international monetary systems. In “Globalizing Capital”, Barry Eichengreen provides an in-depth exploration of the design and numerous challenges of the Bretton Woods compromise, a significant culmination of international collaboration aimed at creating the optimal solution for the international economy.  Understanding the Bretton Woods system through the lens of Rodrik’s trilemma is a critical exercise in not just understanding the limitations of the Bretton Wood system and its eventual collapse, but how international economic systems in general grapple with the three elements of the trilemma. 

Rodrik’s international dilemma posits that an international monetary system must prioritize two out of three elements: deep globalization, national sovereignty, and democracy. 

To understand these tradeoffs, consider the gold standard, which embodied the elements of national sovereignty and hyperglobalization. The common language of gold supported globalized trade networks, while power remained on the national level to pursue goals such as industrial policy through tools such as interest and exchange rates. Rodrik notes that this era, often referred to as the “golden straightjacket,” constrained governments' abilities to address domestic concerns like unemployment, as policies aimed at gaining market confidence often led to deregulation and minimal government intervention. Rodrik's interpretation of the Bretton Woods system suggests that its execution was primarily aligned with national sovereignty and democracy, making trade concessions to bolster domestic policy effectiveness. Interestingly, this description doesn’t actually align with the aspirations of the system (as Eichengreen describes in his book). 

Harry Dexter White's plan, which dominated the final structure of the Bretton Woods system, forsaw “a world free of controls and of pegged currencies superintended by an international institution” – a description much more akin to Rodrik's “global democracy,” prioritizing hyperglobalization and democracy. Yet, as Eichengreen shows in his historical recounting, the actual unfolding of the Bretton Woods system diverged significantly from this goal, largely due to the tensions represented by the trilemma. 

Initially conceived to harmonize hyperglobalization with democratic aims and limited controls, the Bretton Woods system, in practice, conceded to the use of trade controls in order to do what was seen as temporary measures needed to launch the system. Bretton Woods, in essence, found itself caught in the crossfire of attempting to bridge the gap between these divergent priorities – hyperglobalization and national sovereignty – while striving to maintain democratic responsiveness, a failed attempt to straddle all elements of Rodrik's trilemma.
Now, let’s dive into a brief history of the Bretton Woods system, from its vision to its collapse, to learn from the contrast between its goals and the reality of its implementation.

Conceived in the aftermath of World War II, the system was designed with the need to rebuild war-torn economies and establish a new order of economic cooperation and stability. The United States’ position was focused around prioritizing a system of open, multilateral trade enabled by fixed exchange rates and limited controls. This was natural given America’s enormous abundance and hegemony in capital and production, as countries in such conditions historically become very amenable to free trade (see: the British empire). The American vision of global democracy posited that a combination of institutions such as the IMF and heightened interdependence fostered by deep trading links could supplant the traditional role of nation-states in managing international issues, such as the need to suppress political and diplomatic conflicts (Eichengreen 92). 

However, this model quickly confronted reality as post-war economic devastation in Europe and Japan exceeded expectations, necessitating rapid deviations from the original plan. The profound payments deficits overpowered the IMF’s capacities, requiring both current and capital account restrictions to aid countries in maintaining exchange rates. The ‘adjustable peg’ system, which was meant to distribute sovereignty over exchange rates between national governments and the IMF, encountered immediate challenges in reconciling stable exchange rates with the goal of open markets. In retrospect, the history of Bretton Woods was defined by considerable efforts to restore open trade. Its eventual failure can be attributed to the incompatibility between the methods used to manage the system and the incompatibility between interests of sovereign nations, particularly the United States, and global markets.

The progression of trade liberalization during the Bretton Woods era encountered significant hurdles, which could be understood from the perspective of balancing elements of the trilemma. Firstly, governments resisted liberalizing trade fearing worsened terms of trade and lowered living standards. Eichengreen suggests that “trade restrictions might be dismantled without creating unsustainable deficits” (93) if government spending were curtailed. However, such an approach starkly contradicted the domestic political climate of the post-war reconstruction era, effectively making this route to liberalization impracticable. Within the framework of Rodrik's trilemma, this resistance can be seen as the weakness of the “golden straightjacket”-style configuration, where the demands of domestic politics in a post-war context were uniquely powerful (though the influence of domestic needs shouldn’t be underestimated in any case, which Rodrik argues).

Consequently, the focus shifted towards alleviating conflicting needs of sovereign nations to facilitate trade liberalization. This manifested in the recognition of a coordination problem – countries could only increase imports if their exports were also rising, which was contingent on other countries liberalizing trade. This coordination challenge was tasked to the International Trade Organization (ITO), which was newly designed for that purpose. However, the contention between national sovereignty and liberalized trade resurfaced, as evidenced by the United States' reluctance to ratify the ITO agreement, prioritizing its national interests. The resulting compromise was the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), a more flexible arrangement that imposed fewer restrictions on nations. This development underscored how the implementation of Bretton Woods became an exercise in establishing institutions that sought a middle ground, balancing nations' pursuit of self-interest with the gradual deepening of global economic integration. In this context, GATT represented the pragmatic response to the inherent conflict within Rodrik’s trilemma, turning the execution of the Bretton Woods system into a balancing act of empowering nations to pursue their own strategies with a coordination that enables gradual deepening of globalization. 

These evolutions in the international economy, including future developments such as the European Payments Union, are accredited with the successful restoration of trade equilibrium, despite periodic challenges along the way. However, this success paradoxically sowed the seeds for the system's eventual challenges. While the US spearheaded the move to current-account convertibility globally, the redistribution of reserves from America to foreign holdings which came as a consequence of the new global liquidity needs put into question the US’s own national interests within a hyperglobalized, democratic economy. This clash between America’s national interests and its unique role in the Bretton Woods system became described as the Triffin Dilemma. As countries increasingly held dollars as reserves, the US faced a dilemma: either raise interest rates, making it costly for foreign banks to acquire dollars, or inadequately restrain its monetary policy, thereby flooding the international system with liquidity. On the impossibility of this dilemma, Eichengreen describes that “either way, the system remained dependent on dollars for its incremental liquidity needs”. 

This growing asymmetry in the system, with the dollar's rising prominence as the leading reserve currency, led to increased tensions, especially with countries like France, which historically opposed schemes conferring special status on a particular currency. This period of struggle and adjustment in the 1960s reflects Rodrik’s critique of global governance, where he contends that “there is simply too much diversity in the world for nations to be shoehorned into common rules”. This diversity manifested in the IMF's challenges, as it navigated demands from weak-currency countries seeking more generous quotas and increased reserves, while strong-currency nations expressed concerns about enabling deficit countries to exceed their economic means. Central to the Bretton Woods system's liquidity, the United States found itself at a crossroads, facing mounting pressure to devalue its currency. Such a move would not only address its internal economic pressures but also have far-reaching consequences for the Bretton Woods system itself. The system's initial design, aimed at establishing a stable global economic order, gradually succumbed to the pressures epitomized in the Triffin Dilemma. This conflict culminated in the Nixon Shock of 1971, which marked the end of the dollar's gold convertibility and, effectively, the Bretton Woods system itself. 

In conclusion, the trajectory of the Bretton Woods system is an exercise we need to take in understanding Rodrik's trilemma and the trade-offs with which we must look to shape the world's economic landscape.

---

Bitcoiners have spent the past decade convincing themselves and everyone around them that all of international economics can and will be fixed if we all choose to use 21M internet coins.

I'm not sure that this cyborg gold standard is a deeply-enough thought out plan. With this mindset, we (or at least my naive ass, idk about the others) have been holding onto this pipe dream of finding _THE_ theoretically perfect system which achieves all tradeoffs and fixes economics forever. 

The reality is that condiitons in the world change drastically and unpredictably over time. The realities of trade balance, domestic needs, national interests, etc are wildly different today than they were in 1971 and 1944. As such, the tradeoffs we want to choose in Rodrik's trilemma and the Policy trilemma are going to change over time, and so will our systems. Our goal must be to understand what the world needs in just the next cycle, and to build whatever _that_ is. 

What we should be driven to do is to build the infrastructure on which such global systems can be implemented with grace and efficiency, even expanding the possibilities of what can be built at all. Our work is to build the _tools_ for building international economic systems and to do the _research_ for advocating what the optimal system to implement with them is.